what is difference between data warehouse and dataLake?
        Data warehouse -> will store structured data only
        Data Lake -> will store any type of data structured,unstructered,semi-structured
            ex: HDFS 


Earlier developers write java program  but facebook develops


Hive ™ is a distributed, fault-tolerant data warehouse system that enables 
analytics at a massive scale and facilitates reading, writing, and 
managing petabytes of data residing in distributed storage using SQL.

IN HIVE we cannot have relationships in tables
        ex: no primary key 

when we create normal table it will be a internal table where data and meta data managed by hive 
when table is external table only metadata is managed by the hive.

to external table use 
create external table table_name(id int);

if we delete the external data then metadata only deleted

to check whether the table is internal or external:

describe formatted table_name;




Partitioning 

In Apache Hive, 
    partitioning and bucketing are techniques used to optimize query performance and data organization.

    in dynamic partitioning hive will create seperate folder based on 

    we should use partitioning when we have low cardinaality(common values)
    we should use bucketing when we have high cardinaality(uniqueness)

    take any dataset from git or kaggle and create table with partition and while loading the data use partition 


    create country table name code... 
    while loading the data we have to partition





wget and url

WHAT IS bucketing?
it is the dividing the table based on similar rows stored into the bucket 

What is hash?
hadoop uses hash function to get integer value of given input data. It is something like unique fingerprint


what is YARN
Yet another resource negotiator

    it is the resource managament and job scheduling layer in hadoop from version 2.x.

purpose of YARN:
    manage resource(CPU,Memory) in a caluse.
    schedules and monitors distributed applications
    allows multiple frameworks to run simultaneously

YARN ARCHITECTURE:
Resource Manager(RM): Master daemon that manages cluster

Node Manager NM:- runs on each node, monitors resources and manages containers


Aplication Manager:
one per job,negotitates resources with RM and coordinate job execution


containers:
    light weight environments launched by NMs(namenode).